# Flutter Introduction

## 01. Flutter Framework
Technology has become an inseparable part of our lives, especially smartphones . According to data from We Are Social , in January 2020 internet users in Indonesia reached around 175.4 million people. There is an increase of 17% or around 25 million users from 2019. If you look at the total population of Indonesia which is around 272.1 million people, then 64% of them have access to the internet. With the massive number of smartphone users, the requirements for an application developer are becoming more specific . Including requirements on mobile devices targeting Android and iOS platforms. Each platform has an application it's own native .

Developing two platforms has many implications. From a business perspective, the costs that need to be incurred are certainly not cheap. Two apps means there are two types of developers to hire and two types of development to manage. If there is a technology that allows application development on several platforms at once with only one codebase, it's certainly more economical, right? Definitely more efficient in terms of cost, time, and energy.

Interested in studying the technology stack that can make it happen? Let's get acquainted with Flutter. This is a popular and powerful framework made by Google, Flutter is here to develop multi-platform applications that are compiled natively.

&emsp;
## 02. What is Flutter
Flutter is an SDK ( Software Development Kit ) developed by Google to create good applications that can run on multiple platforms. Flutter 2 which is the latest version provides support for you to build applications on Android, iOS, Web, Windows, Linux, and MacOS operating systems. With this, you only need to code once or known as a single codebase . Flutter has also been used by many developers and organizations around the world, besides Flutter is open source .

### Why Flutter
Flutter is different from most other Cross-platform SDKs for building mobile apps . To draw widgets , Flutter uses neither a WebView nor OEM widgets , but a high-performance rendering engine. Flutter can be used in conjunction with existing native apps or used in its entirety for new apps. 

There are several advantages of Flutter, including:

1. **Flutter allows us to create beautiful applications (beautiful)**
Designers can freely create without the many limitations of the framework . Flutter can also control every pixel on the screen, making it easier to create animations. Flutter provides many material design components that work well on Android, iOS, and the web.

2. **Flutter runs very fast**
Flutter uses a graphic engine called Skia-2D which is also used on Chrome and Android. Flutter code uses the Dart language, which allows it to be compiled to native 32-bit and 64-bit ARM code for iOS and Android.

3. **Flutter is very productive**
Flutter has a hot-reload feature that allows you to view compilation results in real-time . With hot-reload , you can easily see code changes on your device, without waiting for a restart and losing state 

4. **Flutter is open source**
Flutter is an open source project with a BSD license. The code in Flutter comes from contributions from hundreds of developers from around the world. Many plugins have been made by developers. You can contribute to the development of Flutter by reporting bugs/issues or helping improve existing code. You can find the source code for Flutter at `https://github.com/flutter/flutter`.

### Flutter Development History
The first version of Flutter named Sky was announced at the 2015 Dart Developer Summit. At that time, Sky only ran on the Android operating system. 

Then, on Google Developer Days in Shanghai, Google announced the Release Preview version of Flutter 2 which was a release before the stable 1.0 version.

On March 3, 2021 yesterday, Flutter announced a version of Flutter 2 with a fairly major update, namely Flutter support for web and desktop platforms (Windows, Linux, and macOS) which entered the stable version .

Since the release of the first beta, Flutter has been widely used to develop mobile applications . Examples are Abbey Road Studios, Alibaba, Capital One, Groupon, Hamilton, JD.com, Philips Hue, Reflectly, Tencent, and GITS Indonesia.

### Dart
As we already know, Flutter application is written in Dart language. You should have learned about Darts fundamentals in the Getting Started Programming with Darts class . To refresh your memory we will review a little about Dart.

Dart programming language is a general-purpose programming language designed by Lars Bak and Kasper Lund. This programming language was developed as an application programming language that can be easily learned and deployed.

This programming language made by Google can be used to develop various platforms including the web, mobile applications, servers, and devices that carry Internet of Things (IoT) technology.

This programming language can be used to develop applications that run on a variety of modern browsers. Dart can also be used to develop applications from a single codebase into Android and iOS applications.

The Dart programming language can be used freely by developers because it is released open-source by Google under the BSD license. Dart programming language is a class-based and object-oriented programming language using the C programming language Syntax .

This language was introduced by Google as a replacement for the JavaScript programming language, but optionally it can be compiled into JavaScript using the Dart-to-JavaScript compiler . Slightly different from the dynamic type JavaScript programming language, the Dart programming language is a static type programming language.

Okay, so far we have learned about what Flutter is, including its history and why we need to learn to develop applications with Flutter. In this class you will learn the basics of developing Flutter applications, such as packages , commonly used widgets , how to move pages using Navigation, to the process of building into APKs that can be installed on your smartphone.

> Note: The material in this class will be delivered in many options, ranging from the operating system (OS), Android or iOS platform, and Integrated Development Environment (IDE). Please adjust it according to your hardware/software specifications and skip material that you feel is not needed. 

To pass this class, you only need to submit submissions from one platform, for example, if you choose the Android platform, you don't need to submit the iOS or web version. 

Let's move on to the next material, namely Flutter installation. 

&emsp;
## 03. Flutter Installation
Before starting to develop applications using Flutter, of course, we need to prepare and install any tools needed to create Flutter applications. To install Flutter, there are different ways in each operating system. Check out the following method according to the operating system you are using:

### Minimum Requirement
Before installing and running Flutter, your device must meet the minimum requirements as below:

#### Windows
1. Operating System: Windows 7 SP1 or later (64-bit).
2. Storage Space: 1.64 GB and does not include IDE and other tools.
3. Flutter depends on the tools in the environment:
      1. Windows Powershell 5.0 or the latest version (already included in the Windows 10 installation package), you can download at the following link `https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/powershell/scripting/install/installing-windows-powershell`.
      2. Git for Windows 2.x, with the option "Use Git from the Windows Command Prompt", you can download at the following link `https://git-scm.com/download/win`.

If Git for Windows is already installed, make sure you can run git commands from Command Prompt (CMD) or PowerShell.

#### MacOs
1. Operating System: Mac OS 64-bit.
2. Storage space: 2.8 GB and does not include IDE and other tools.
3. Flutter depends on these command-line tools available in the environment:
      1. bash
      2. curl
      3. git 2.x
      4. Mkdir 
      5. rm
      6. unzip
      7. which

#### Linux
1. Operating System: 64-bit Linux.
2. Storage space: 1.8 GB and does not include IDE and other tools.
3. Flutter depends on these command-line tools available in the environment:
      1. bash
      2. curl
      3. git 2.x
      4. mkdir
      5. rm
      6. unzip
      7. which
      8. xz-utils
4. Shared Libraries : The test command in Flutter depends on the libraries available in the environment.
      1. libGLU.so.1 - provided by mesa packages such as, libglu1-mesa on Ubuntu/Debian.

### Flutter SDK Installation
Once the minimum requirements are met, you can start installing the Flutter SDK. The way to get the Flutter SDK is as follows:

#### Windows
1. Download the installation package to get the latest stable version of the Flutter SDK at the web address `https://flutter.dev/docs/development/tools/sdk/releases`. Download the latest version on the stable channel according to the operating system used.
2. Extract the zip file and place the flutter folder in the desired installation location for the Flutter SDK. For example C:\Development, don't install Flutter in a directory like C:\Program Files or one that requires administrator privileges.
3. Find the flutter_console.bat file in the flutter directory. Start by double-clicking or running the script and you are now ready to run Flutter commands in the Flutter Console.

#### MacOS & Linux
1. Download the installation package to get the latest stable version of Flutter SDK at the web address https://flutter.dev/docs/development/tools/sdk/releases , grab the latest version on the stable channel according to the operating system used.
2. Extract the zip file and place the flutter folder in the desired installation location for the Flutter SDK. For example ~/development.
3. Add Flutter Tools to your PATH.

```bash
export PATH="$PATH:~/development/flutter/bin"
```

### Path Update
The next step is to update the path so that the Flutter command can be used at the command prompt/terminal. Here are the steps:

#### Windows
1. From the search bar in the Start menu, type 'env' and select Edit Environment Variable for your account.
2. Click on the Environment Variables button.
3. Under User variable check if there is an entry called PATH, if there is then select it then edit, if not there then create a new one with variable name Path.
4. Edit or add the values ​​with the Flutter SDK directory.
      1. If there is an entry, add the full path to flutter\bin using a semicolon (;) as a separator from the existing values ​​(if using single-line edit mode).
      2. If the entry is not found, create a new user variable and name it Path and set flutter\bin as its value.

Note that you must close and reopen all existing console windows for the changes to take effect.

#### MacOS & Linux
You can update the PATH variable, only for the current (temporary) command-line session. You may want to permanently update the variable, so that it can run flutter commands in any terminal session.

The steps to permanently modify the PATH variable for all terminal sessions will depend on the device used. Generally, you can add a PATH variable like this:
1. Specify the directory where you put the Flutter SDK. You will need it in step 3 of this example.
2. Open (or create) $HOME/.bash_profile . The directory and filename may be different on your device (could be .profile, .bash_profile, .zshrc, .bashrc, or something else).
3. Add the following line and change [FLUTTER_DIRECTORY] to the directory where you put the Flutter SDK:

```bash
export PATH="$PATH:[FLUTTER_DIRECTORY]/flutter/bin"
```

4. Run source $HOME/.bash_profile to reload the current terminal.
5. Make sure the flutter/bin directory is now in your PATH by running the command :

```bash
echo $PATH
```

### Flutter Doctor
Flutter doctor is a command to check the completeness of the flutter framework you are using, such as the flutter version you are using, the Android SDK you are using, the iOS SDK you are using (only on MacOS), the devices you are connected to, and so on. Double check and make sure the dependencies for the setup are complete. Run the following command to open flutter doctor:

```bash
flutter doctor
```

This command checks your environment and displays the report to a terminal window. The Flutter SDK already includes the Dart SDK, so you don't need to install Dart separately. Check the output carefully for other software that you may need to install or do something further (shown in bold text).

```bash
[-] Android toolchain - develop for Android devices

• Android SDK at D:\Android\sdk

**✗ Android SDK is missing command line tools; download from https://goo.gl/XxQghQ**

• Try re-installing or updating your Android SDK,

    visit https://flutter.io/setup/#android-setup for detailed instructions.
```

This section describes how to complete the Flutter SDK installation process. After installing the missing dependencies, run the flutter doctor command again to verify that you have everything set up correctly.

&emsp;
## 04. IDE Installation
You can build applications with Flutter using a text editor in combination with command-line tools . However, we recommend using one of the recommended editor plugins for a better experience. This plugin has features like code completion, syntax highlighting, widget editing help , support for run & debug, and much more.

Installing Android Studio is necessary to build Android apps with Flutter, but the alternative is to install the Java SDK and the Android SDK itself.

If you already have Android Studio installed, it is recommended not to install Java separately and other Android environments such as ANDROID_HOME or ANDROID_SDK_ROOT . If it's already installed and an android licenses error occurs in Flutter Doctor, try uninstalling the Java package.

Follow the steps below to add editor plugins for Android Studio, IntelliJ, and Visual Studio Code.

### VSCode
Visual Studio Code (VSCode) is a lightweight editor for combining command line especially Flutter applications and includes debugging support. 

To download Visual Studio Code, visit the link https://code.visualstudio.com/download .

Here's how to install Flutter and Dart plugins in VSCode:
1. Open the pre-installed Visual Studio Code application.
2. Then activate the Command Line by selecting **View > Command Palette…**
3. Type “ **Install** ” then select **Extensions: Install Extensions**.
4. Or directly click on the **Extensions** tab on the left.
5. Type “ **Flutter** ” in the Extensions search field, and select Flutter in the list of available extensions. Then click the **Install** button . The Dart plugin will also be installed automatically.
6. Click **Reload** to Activate  to reload VSCode.

Once done, validate the Flutter plugin in VSCode in the following way:

1. Activate the Command Line by selecting **View>Command Palette...**
2. Type “ **doctor** ”, then select Flutter: Run Flutter Doctor.
3. Review the OUTPUT panel for any issues.

### XCode + Simulator Installation
To run Flutter apps on iOS, you need to install XCode first. XCode is an IDE used to develop and deploy iOS applications.

All you have to do to develop an iOS app using Flutter is: 

1. Download XCode, you can download it directly from the AppStore.
2. Open a terminal and enter the command below: This command will ensure that the command-line tools operation in XCode will use the latest version.

```bash
sudo xcode-select --switch /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer
sudo xcodebuild -runFirstLaunch
```

3. Finally, sign the XCode license agreement by opening XCode and confirming. Or you can also sign using the terminal and run this command:

```bash
sudo xcodebuild -license
```

Also make sure to always download and update your version of XCode, as Flutter does not support older versions of XCode.

> Note: Please note that the XCode here is only needed for the debugging and deployment process. For now, it cannot be used for editing the Flutter application program code in XCode.

So if you want to develop iOS apps using Flutter, what is recommended is:

1. Installing Android Studio or Visual Studio Code.
2. Fixed XCode installation.
3. Edit the program code in Android Studio or Visual Studio Code.
4. Run the app using Android Studio, Visual Studio Code, or terminal/cmd.

&emsp;
## 05. Project Wizard
After successfully installing the Flutter SDK and IDE, it means that the tools we need are ready. This section will explain the steps for creating a new Flutter app, starting with templates, how to use the app, and using "Hot Reload" after you make changes to your app code.

Choose your favorite development tool (IDE) to write command line, build, and run Flutter applications.

### VSCode
1. Open Visual Studio Code.
2. Activate the Command Line by clicking **View>Command Palette...**
3. Type “**Flutter**” then select **Flutter: New Project.**
4. Enter **the project name** , and press **Enter**.
5. Create or select a directory for the new project folder.
6. Wait a few moments for VSCode to finish setting up the project.

### Terminal & Editor
1. Open Terminal/CMD.
2. Use the flutter create command to create a new project.

```bash
flutter create projectName
cd coded
```

The above command creates a Flutter project directory containing a simple demonstration application using Material Components.

> Tip : The Dart code for your app is in lib/main.dart. For a more detailed description of what each code block does, see the comments included in the file.

&emsp;
## 06. Running Android or IOS Emulator
Previously we have successfully installed the flutter SDK, IDE, and created a new project based on the IDE used. Now we will start learning how to run Android projects using an emulator or device, or iOS projects using a simulator.

### Android

We will use a previously created Flutter project to run on an emulator or Android device. There are several things that need to be considered to be able to run the project, the description is as follows:

#### Android Emulator
Before using the emulator, you need to make sure of a few conditions. 

1. Virtualization
To run the emulator inside Android Studio, ensure the virtualization aspect. Your system must meet the requirements, namely the terms of the processor and operating system of the laptop/PC you are using.
2. Processor
      1. Intel: If you are using an Intel processor, make sure that it supports Intel VT-X, Intel EM64T (Intel 64), and Execute Disable (XD) Bit functionality. 
      
      Intel processors are capable of running emulators on Windows, Linux, and MacOS operating systems.
      2. AMD: If you are using AMD, then make sure that it supports AMD Virtualization (AMD-V) and Supplemental Streaming SIMD Extensions 3 or commonly known as SSSE3.
      
      AMD processors can only run emulators on Linux operating systems. 

#### Preparation for Running using the Emulator
1. To run the application, click the **Tools** menu , then select **Device Manager**.
2. To create a new emulator, click the **Create device** or **Create virtual device** button .
3. The Select Hardware page will appear. 
If you want to create your own hardware (hardware) specification, select **New Hardware Profile** . You can define the hardware configuration according to your needs. Remember to use an emulator configuration that matches the capabilities of the laptop or computer you are using. After that click **Next** .
4. The System Image page will appear.
On this page you can select the Android version of the emulator you are going to create. Select the version that has been downloaded, for example **Pie** . See the download button on the right. You need to download it first if you want to use it. After that click **Next**.
5. The Verify Configuration page will appear.
On this page you can change the predefined hardware configuration. Press the **Show Advanced Settings** button at the bottom left. When finished, click **Finish** . The emulator settings are complete and can be run immediately. You can open the emulator by pressing the green button on the right.

#### Android Device
In addition to using the Android Emulator, you can also run or debug using a real smartphone device . Running applications using physical devices has several advantages over emulators, namely: Faster, Lighter, and Easier.

By using a genuine smartphone device, we can ensure that our application runs properly when it reaches the user's hands. The problem with this approach is the variety of device models on the market. However, this discussion is not covered in this class.

Let's follow the steps to run the run or debugging process. The appearance of the following steps will certainly be different from the device you are using. However, in general the steps will be the same.

1. Make sure the device to be used matches the target SDK or at least supports the lowest SDK version that the application is using.
2. Open **settings** and enter the **About** menu . On this menu page, you need to find information about Build number.
3. Then press Build number  7 times.
4. Return to the **settings** menu at the beginning and a new menu will appear under about, namely **Developer Options**.
5. Enter the **Developer Options** menu and make sure the **USB Debugging Mode** option is **On**.
6. After completing the settings on the device, the device can also be connected to the laptop or computer that you are using.

> Note : Some smartphone vendors have unique operating systems. The appearance of the settings and the location of the options may be different from the image above. Some vendors also require you to download special drivers before you can connect them to Android Studio. We recommend visiting the website or reading the appropriate instructions for the vendor of your device.

### IOS
We will use the previously created Flutter project to run in the iOS simulator. There are several things that need to be considered to be able to run the project, the description is as follows:

#### IOS Simulator
iOS Simulator or Simulator is an application used to run iOS applications. Simulator is the default application of XCode.

Apart from the Simulator, we can actually use the original iPhone device. However, to run on the original device we need an Apple developer account. So to simplify the problem, this module will only teach with the Simulator media.

Follow these steps to open the Simulator:

1. Open a terminal and run the following code :

```bash
open -a Simulator
```

2. The simulator application will appear, for example as shown below:
3. Make sure the Simulator you are running is 64-bit (Iphone 5 and above), if not then change the configuration by accessing via Device or **File -> Open Devices (latest version)**.

> Note: The example above was taken with MacOS Catalina. If you are using a version below there is a possibility of display differences. If you encounter a problem please ask in the discussion forum.

&emsp;
## 07. Running Flutter Project
After knowing the preparation before running the project on Android and on iOS, both on the emulator and on the device . Here's how to run it in some of the IDEs described earlier.

### VSCode
1. Find the **Status Bar** at the very bottom of the VSCode window.
2. Select the device in the **Device Selector area**.
      1. If no device is available and you want to use the device simulator, click **No Device** and launch the simulator.
      2. To set up a physical device (personal smartphone), follow the device-specific instructions when installing the **Flutter SDK** for your OS.
3. Activate the **Command Line** by selecting **Run > Start Debugging** or **pressing F5** , or in the void main code, **run and debug** will appear , or on the Run tab on the left.
4. Wait for the app to launch and watch the progress in the Debug Console view .
5. Once the app build is complete, you will see the starter app on your device.

### Terminal & Editor
1. Check if the Android device is running. If nothing is displayed, follow the device-specific instructions when installing the Flutter SDK  for your OS.
2. Go to the directory where the project is located.
3. Run the application with the following command :

```bash
flutter run
```

4. Once the app build is complete, you will see the starter app on your device.

Congratulations on successfully running your first Flutter app!

&emsp;
## 08. Running on Web
In addition to the mobile platform, Flutter can also run on a web browser. In the development process, for debugging purposes we need to use Google Chrome as a browser. Since Flutter version 2.0 Flutter Web has entered a stable version so that it can be used directly. If you're using a version below, you'll need to activate the beta channel first. Please follow the steps on the following blog .

To add web support to your project, run the following command via terminal from the project location:

```bash
> flutter config --enable-web
> flutter create .
```

After the configuration and re-create process is successful, the web folder will be added to your project folder. Inside this folder will contain html files and other web configurations. You can try running this Flutter web application by selecting the chrome target device in the IDE you are using.

Once the Chrome target device is selected as above, you can run the app in the same way as when running it on a mobile platform. If you want to run through the terminal, then the command is like this:

```bash
flutter run -d chrome
```

Once the build process is complete, a browser window will appear. On Flutter Web, note that Flutter has two different renderer types, both of which include:

1. **HTML renderer**
This renderer uses a combination of HTML, CSS, Canvas, and SVG elements. This type of renderer has a smaller download size.

2. **CanvasKit renderer**
This renderer works in the same way as mobile or desktop platforms. The CanvasKit renderer has higher performance, but will add up to about 2 MB in size.

You can specify which renderer to use by adding parameters to the command line , for example as follows:

```bash
flutter run -d chrome --web-renderer html
flutter run -d chrome --web-renderer canvaskit
```

If you don't define the `--web-renderer` parameter , the renderer will use auto mode ( default ). This option will use the HTML renderer when the app is running in a mobile browser and use CanvasKit when the app is running in a desktop browser.

&emsp;
## 09. Hot Reload
Flutter's hot reload feature helps you to experiment, build UI, add features, and fix bugs quickly and easily. Hot reload works by injecting updated code files into a running Dart Virtual Machine (VM). After the VM updates a class with new versions of fields and functions, the Flutter framework automatically rebuilds the widget . This lets you quickly see the effects of your changes.

Furthermore, here's how to hot reload the Flutter app:

1. Run the Flutter application. Only Flutter apps in debug mode can hot reload .
2. Change some small code in one of the Dart files in your project . If the changes are large or the changes are in initState or main , you will need to do a hot restart .
3. If you are using a Flutter supported IDE/editor (Android Studio/IntelliJ/Visual Studio Code), select Save/Save All (cmd+s/ctrl+s) or click the Hot Reload button on the toolbar in each IDE.
4. If you're running your application on the command line using flutter run , enter the r command in a terminal window.

After the hot reload operation is successful, you will see a message in the console like this:

```bash
> Performing hot reload...

> Reloaded 1 of 448 libraries in 978ms.
```

Hot reload causes all existing widgets to be rebuilt. Only the code involved in rebuilding the widget is re-executed automatically. For example the main and initState functions will not be rerun if using hot reload .

What's the difference between hot reload , hot restart , and full restart ?

1. **Hot reload** loads the code changes into the VM and re-runs the build method built into the widget. This will rebuild the existing widgets, and maintain the last state of the app.
2. **Hot restart** loads code changes into the VM and restarts the application from scratch and will lose the application state (back to initial values).
3. **Full restart** compiles the code from scratch, there is no keyboard shortcut for this, you have to stop and re-run the project (click stop then run again).

Web Flutter currently only supports hot restart.

### VSCode
Flutter offers a fast development cycle with Hot Reload . The feature has the ability to reload running application code without restarting or losing application state. To do this, make changes to the application source, tell your IDE or command line tool that you want to Hot Reload, and see the changes on your simulator, emulator or device.

1. Open **lib/main.dart**.
2. Change the string ' You have **pushed** the button this many times ' to ' You have **clicked** the button this many times '.
**Important:** Do not terminate your application. Let your application run.
3. Save command line changes by: **Choose File > Save All** , or **click Hot Reload (yellow lightning bolt button)**.

You'll immediately see the updated string in the running app.

### Terminal & Editor
Flutter offers a fast development cycle with Hot Reload. It has the ability to reload running application code without restarting or losing application state. To make changes to the main application, you can call the IDE or that you want to Hot reload, and see the changes to the simulator, emulator or device you are using.

1. Open **lib/main.dart**.
2. Change the string ' You have **pushed** the button this many times ' to ' You have **clicked** the button this many times '.
**Important:** Do not terminate your application. Let your application run.
3. Save command line changes.
4. Type command r in terminal window, to do **Hot Reload**.

You'll immediately see the updated string in the running app.

### Special Case
The next section describes a common situation where modified code will no longer run after hot reloading. In some cases, minor changes to Dart's code will allow you to continue using hot reloading for your app. In some cases, we need to do a hot restart or full restart:

1. Applications die or exit
Hot reload will stop if the application stops or exits, for example if the application has been in the background for too long .
2. Compilation errors
When code changes show compilation errors, hot reload always produces an error message like below:

```bash
Hot reload was rejected:'/path/Library/Developer/CoreSimulator/Devices/AC94F0FF-16F7-46C8-B4BF-218B73C547AC/ data/Containers/Data/Application/4F72B076-42AD-44A4-A7CF-57D9F93E895E/tmp/ios_testWIDYdS/ios_test/lib/main.dart': warning: line 16 pos 38: unbalanced '{' opens here
Widget build(BuildContext context) {
^
'/path/Library/Developer/CoreSimulator/Devices/AC94F0FF-16F7-46C8-B4BF-218B73C547AC/data/Containers/Data/Application/4F72B076-42AD-44A4-A7CF-57D9F93E895E/Wtestmp/iosS_test_ lib/main.dart': error: line 33 pos 5: unbalanced ')'
);
^
```

In this situation simply fix the error on the specified Dart line of code to keep hot reloading.

3. CupertinoTabView's builder
Hot reload will not run when there are changes to the builder in CupertinoTabView. For more please read `https://github.com/flutter/flutter/issues/43574`.
4. Hot reload enum type
will not work when enum type is changed to regular class or vice versa.

```dart
// Example before:
enum Level { beginner, intermediate, advanced }
 
 
// Example after:
class Level {
  Level(this.id);
  you id ;
}
```

5. Hot reload font change
supports most asset changes. However, if you change the font, you will have to use a hot restart.
6. Generic types

```dart
Hot reload will not work when the generic type declaration is modified .
// Example before:
class A<X> {
  X ax;
}
 
 
// Example after:
class A<X, Y> {
  X ax;
  Y ay ;
}
```

7. Native code
If you change the native code for each platform (such as Java, Kotlin, Swift, or Objective-C), you will need to do a full restart (stop and re-run the project) to see the changes.
8. Previous state combined with new code
Flutter's hot reload feature is sometimes described as stateful hot reload which preserves the state of your app. This allows you to see only the effects of the most recent changes without discarding the current state. For example, if your app requires users to be logged in, you can modify and hot reload multiple pages below the navigation hierarchy, without re-entering your login credentials. When saved, then the output will be in accordance with what we want or we change.

If a code change affects the state of your app, such as data or a function that was supposed to run properly suddenly stops working. Then it is recommended to use Hot Restart.

Like the code below:

```dart
class MyWidget extends StatelessWidget {
  Widget build(BuildContext context) {
    return GestureDetector(onTap: () => print('T'));
  }
}
```

Changed to :

```dart
class MyWidget extends StatefulWidget {
  @override
  State createState() => MyWidgetState();
}
 
class MyWidgetState extends State { /*...*/ }
```

Then press the hot reload button, then the console will display the following output:
`MyWidget is not a subtype of StatelessWidget`
In this situation, a full restart is required to see the updated apps.

Congratulations you have completed this first module. Hope you keep it up. Especially now that you've created your project and run your first Flutter app. Wow! In the next module you are ready to create your own application. Ready? Keep your spirits up and see you in the next module!

&emsp;
## 10. Summary
Congratulations you have completed this first module. Hope you keep it up. Especially now that you've created your project and run your first Flutter app. Wow! Let's recall what was covered in this module:

1. Flutter is an SDK (Software Development Kit) developed by Google to create good applications that can run on multiple platforms.
2. Flutter 2 which is the latest version provides support for you to build applications on Android, iOS, Web, Windows, Linux, and MacOS operating systems.
3. Flutter offers four characteristics or advantages, including: beautiful, fast, productive, and open.
4. Flutter is written in Dart. Dart is a class-based and object-oriented programming language using the C programming language syntax.
5. To be able to develop applications using Flutter, we need to set up and install the Flutter SDK. These tools are available on Windows, macOS, and Linux operating systems.
6. Flutter has support for several popular IDEs, such as Android Studio, IntelliJ IDEA, and Visual Studio Code.
7. We can test and run Flutter apps using a physical device, Android Emulator, iOS Simulator, or web browser.
8. Flutter Web has two different types of renderers: the HTML renderer and the CanvasKit renderer. If it does not define what renderer is used, then the auto mode will be used.
9. Flutter has a very useful feature for increasing development productivity, namely hot reloading. This feature will immediately apply code changes without having to do a rebuild process.

In the next module you are ready to create your own application. Ready? Keep your spirits up and see you in the next module!

&emsp;
## 11. Quiz
1. Flutter has productive characteristics. What are these characteristics? 
<br> =

2. Which of the following statements is true regarding hot reloading?
<br> =