# Collections

## Introduction to Collection
We have learned about *data types* and *control flow*. Next, we will now face a more complex problem. In order to solve it efficiently, we need a more sophisticated data structure. 

In addition to strings, numbers, and booleans, Dart still has other data types that can store lots of data at once which in programming terms are known as **collections**. Collections are objects that can store a collection of other objects. Examples of collections on Dart include `List`, `Set`, and `Map`.

&emsp;
## 02. List
List as the name implies can accommodate a lot of data into one object. In everyday life we ​​use lists to store shopping lists, phone numbers, etc. Likewise with Dart we can store various types of data such as *strings, numbers, and booleans*. The way of writing is also very easy. Just consider the following example:

```dart
List<int> numberList = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
```

The code above is an example of a List object containing a data set of type *integer*. Since the compiler can know the data types contained in a List object, we don't need to write them explicitly.

```dart
var numberList = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
var stringList = ['Hello', 'John', 'Dart'];
```

In the example above, we define data types that can be included in a List inside square brackets (`[ ]`). Just like variables, *if we don't define values ​​explicitly in the List, then the List will store dynamic types* or can store all data types.

```dart
List dynamicList = [1, 'John', true]; // List<dynamic>
```

When playing with a List, of course there are times when we want to access certain positions from the List. To do this, we can use an *indexing* function like this:

```dart
print(dynamicList[1]);
```

Look at the code above. The indexing function is marked with a `[ ]`. If you think that the console will display the number 1, then your guess is not right. Because in a List, the index starts from 0. So when we will access the data in the `dynamicList` which is at the 1st index, it means that the data is the data in the 2nd position. So the data to be displayed on the console is **John**.

Then what will happen if we try to display items from the List that are outside of the List size? For example, you want to access the 3rd index of `dynamicList`:

```dart
print(dynamicList[3]);
```

The result is an error! The compiler will tell you that the command cannot be executed. The following error message will appear:

```bash
> Unhandled exception:
> RangeError (index): Invalid value: Not in range 0..2, inclusive: 3
```

The message above tells us that the List has been accessed with an illegal index. This will happen if the index we want is negative or greater than or equal to the size of the List. Remember *looping*? To display all items from the *list* we can use *looping*. For example, consider the following code:

```dart
for(int i = 0; i < stringList.length; i++) {
  print(stringList[i]);
}
```

In the code above, we use looping as much as the number of data in the list to print the data in the list. We can call the number of data in the *list* via the `.length` property. In addition we can also use the `foreach` function to display data in a list. `stringList.forEach((s) => print(s));`.

The above mechanism is known as **lambda or anonymous function**. We will delve into this in more detail in a future module. 

So far we have only learned to initialize and access data from a List. Surely you are asking, "How do we manipulate the data on the List?" Now, to add data to the *list*, we can use the `add()` function.

```dart
stringList.add('Flutter');

/* Output :
[Hello, John, Dart, Flutter]
*/
```

Then what if we want to add data but not at the end of the List? The answer is with the **insert** function. Inside the insert function we need to enter 2 parameters, namely the index list and the data to be inserted.

```dart
stringList.insert(0, 'Programming');

/* Output :
[Programming, Hello, John, Dart, Flutter]
*/
```

To change the value in the list, we can immediately initialize the new value according to the desired index.

```dart
stringList[1] = 'Application';

/* Output :
[Programming, Application, John, Dart, Flutter]
*/
```

Meanwhile, to delete data, there are several **remove** functions that we can use, including:

```dart
stringList.remove('Programming'); // To remove list with Programming value
stringList.removeAt(1);           // To remove list index of 1
stringList.removeLast();          // To remove last list data
stringList.removeRange(0, 2);     // To remove list from index of 0 to index of 1 (index of 2 still in use)\
```

### Spread Operator
Dart has an interesting feature for adding multiple values ​​to a List in a short way, namely the spread operator. As the name "spread" implies, this feature is used to spread the value in a collection into multiple elements. Spread operators are written with three dots (`...`). Let's look at the following code example:

```dart
var favorites = ['Seafood', 'Salad', 'Nugget', 'Soup'];
var others = ['Cake', 'Pie', 'Donut'];
var allFavorites = [favorites, others];
print(allFavorites);
 
/* output :
[[Seafood, Salad, Nugget, Soup], [Cake, Pie, Donut]]
 */
```

List values ​​will not be concatenated, Instead of concatenating their values, the allFavorites variable becomes a List that holds two Lists in it. Well, with the spread operator we can combine the two lists above:

```dart
var favorites = ['Seafood', 'Salad', 'Nugget', 'Soup'];
var others = ['Cake', 'Pie', 'Donut'];
var allFavorites = [...favorites, ...others];
print(allFavorites);
 
/* output :
[Seafood, Salad, Nugget, Soup, Cake, Pie, Donut]
*/
```

Yup, with the spread operator we can insert each element in a List into another List. To deal with Lists that can be null, we can use the null-aware spread operator (`...?`) as follows:

```dart
var list;
var list2 = [0, ...?list];
print(list2);
 
/* output :
[0]
*/
```

&emsp;
## 03. Set
Next we will discuss the second type of *collection*, namely **Set**. A set is a *collection* that can only store unique values. This is useful when you don't want the same or duplicate data to exist in a *collection*. We can declare a Set in the following ways:

```dart
var numberSet = {1, 4, 6};
Set<int> anotherSet = new Set.from([1, 4, 6, 4, 1]);
print(anotherSet);
 
/* Output: 
{1, 4, 6}
*/
```

Set will automatically discard the same number, so the result is {1, 4, 6}. To add data to the Set we can use the `add()` or `addAll()` function.

```dart
numberSet.add(6);
numberSet.addAll({2, 2, 3});

/* Output: 
{1, 4, 6, 2, 3}
*/
```

The add function will add one item to the Set, while addAll is used to add multiple items at once. Duplicate values ​​will be ignored. Then use the `remove()` function to remove objects in the desired set.

```dart
numberSet.remove(3);

/* Output: 
{1, 4, 6, 2}
*/
```

The above code will remove the value 3 in the Set, **not the 3rd index**. Then to display data at a certain index, use the `elementAt()` function.

```dart
var numberSet = {1, 4, 6};
 
numberSet.add(6);
numberSet.addAll({2, 2, 3});
numberSet.remove(3);
  
print(numberSet.elementAt(2));
 
// Output: 6
```

In addition, Dart also has `union` and `intersection` functions to find out the union and intersection of 2 (two) sets. As an example:

```dart
var setA = {1, 2, 4, 5};
var setB = {1, 5, 7};
 
var union = setA.union(setB);
var intersection = setA.intersection(setB);
 
print(union);
print(intersection);
 
// union: {1, 2, 4, 5, 7}
// intersection: {1, 5}
```

&emsp;
## 04. Map
The third collection is Map, which is a collection that can store data in *key-value* format. Consider the following example:

```dart
var capital = {
  'Jakarta': 'Indonesia',
  'London': 'England',
  'Tokyo': 'Japan'
};
```

The *string* to the left of the colon (`:`) is a *key*, while the one to the right is the *value*. Then to access the value of the Map, we can use the *key* that has been entered. For example, we can use the key “London” to get the value “England”:

```dart
print(capital['London']);
 
// Output: England
```

We can display any key in the Map by using the `keys` property.

```dart
var mapKeys = capital.keys;
 
// mapKeys = (Jakarta, London, Tokyo)
```

Meanwhile, to find out what values ​​are in the Map, we can use the `values` ​​property.

```dart
var mapValues = capital.values;
 
// mapValues = (Indonesia, England, Japan)
```

To add a new key-value to the Map, we can do it in the following way:

```dart
capital['New Delhi'] = 'India';
print(capital);
 
// Output: {Jakarta: Indonesia, London: England, Tokyo: Japan, New Delhi: India}
```

&emsp;
## 05. Summary
To solve more complex problems efficiently, we need more sophisticated data structures than ordinary data types. Darts have other data types that can store a lot of data at once, such as `List`, `Set`, and `Map`. 

Some of the things we have discussed in this module include:

1. `List` is used to store a lot of data. The data in the List is arranged sequentially and accessed using index.

```dart
var numberList = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
var stringList = ['Hello', 'John', 'Dart'];
```

2. `List` implements zero-based indexing, where 0 is the index of the first value and list.length - 1 is the index of the last value. 
3. `Set` are used to store lots of data in a unique, non-duplicated, unordered, and unIndexed manner. `var numberSet = {1, 4, 6};`
4. `Set` has several functions that can be used, including:
      1. add(value), to add value to Set. 
      2. remove(value), to remove the value in the Set. 
      3. union(other), creates a new set containing the union of this Set and another Set. 
      4. intersection(other), creates a new set containing the slices of this Set and another Set.
5. `Map` stores a lot of data in the *key-value* pair format

```dart
var capital = {
  'Jakarta': 'Indonesia',
  'London': 'England',
  'Tokyo': 'Japan'
};
```

6. There are several properties available on `Map`, including:
      1. keys, to display all the keys in the `Map`. 
      2. values, to find out all the values ​​in the `Map`. 
      3. clear(), to delete all key-values ​​in the `Map`.
7. When accessing a key that is not in the `Map`, the value of the variable will be null

```dart
print(capital['New Delhi']); // null
```

&emsp;
## 06. Quiz

```dart
var capital = {
  'Jakarta': 'Indonesia',
  'London': 'England',
  'Tokyo': 'Japan'
};
capital['New Delhi'] = 'India';


print(capital['Tokyo']);
```

1. what is the output of the code above?
<br> =

2. The property of a List that is used to display the size or amount of data in it, is… ?
<br> =