# Functional Style

## 01 Paradigm of Functional Style
As stated earlier, Dart is a language that supports multi-paradigms. This means that apart from being an object-oriented programming language, Dart's syntax also uses a functional programming style.

*Functional programming* is a programming paradigm in which the computational process is based on pure mathematical functions. Functional programming (FP) is written in a declarative style that focuses on “what to solve” rather than “how to solve” in an imperative style.

### Pure Functions
Pure functions means a function depends on the arguments or parameters passed to it. So a function call with the same argument value will always give the same result. For example, in the `sum()` function, the value returned will depend on the arguments given.

```dart
int sum(int num1, int num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
}
```

### Recursion
In functional programming, there is no loop concept like `for` or `while`. Iteration in functional programming is done through recursion or function calls from the function itself, until it reaches the base case.

```dart
int fibonacci(n) {
  if (n <= 0) {
    return 0;
  } else if(n == 1) {
    return 1;
  } else {
    return fibonacci(n - 1) + fibonacci(n - 2);
  }
}
```

### Immutable Variables
Variables in functional programming are immutable, meaning that we cannot change a variable once it is initialized. Instead of changing the value of a variable, we can create a new variable to store data. This mechanism aims to make our code more secure because the state of the application will not change as long as the application is running.

```dart
var x = 5; // immutable variable 
x = x + 1; // non-immutable variable
```

> Functions are first-class citizen and can be higher-order

The point of a function being a first-class citizen is that it behaves like any other programming component. A function can be passed to a variable as a parameter in a function and also as a return value in a function. *Higher order functions* are functions that take other functions as arguments and can also return functions.

&emsp;
## 02. Anonymous Functions
Do you still remember the function material and how to make it? As we know, to declare a function we need to define the return value and also the function name.

```dart
int sum(int num1, int num2) {
  return num1 + num2;
}
```

Most functions in Dart have names like `sum()`, `main()`, or `print()`. In Dart we can create functions that are not named alias *nameless or anonymous*. This anonymous function is also known as a **lambda**. To create a lambda or anonymous function, we simply write parentheses to accept the parameters and the body of the function.

```dart
void main() {
  (int num1, int num2) {
    return num1 + num2;
  };
}
```

Then how can we use this function? As explained earlier that a function is a first-class citizen, a function is also an object that can be stored as a variable. We can use the `var` keyword or explicitly use the `Function` data type.

```dart
void main() {
  var sum = (int num1, int num2) {
    return num1 + num2;
  };
 
  Function printLambda = () {
    print('This is lambda function');
  };

  printLambda();
  print(sum(3, 4));
}
```

In addition, lambda also supports function expressions to make function code more concise by using fat arrows (`=>`).

```dart
var sum = (int num1, int num2) => num1 + num2;
Function printLambda = () => print('This is lambda function');
```

&emsp;
## 03. High-Order Functions
After studying the previous module, you may ask what can be done with lambda or anonymous function? We can use lambda to create a higher-order function. A higher order function is a function that takes another function as a parameter, becomes the return type, or both.

```dart
void myHigherOrderFunction(String message, Function myFunction) {
  print(message);
  print(myFunction(3, 4));
}
```

The function above is a higher order function because it accepts parameters in the form of other functions. To call the function above, we can directly enter a lambda as a parameter or a variable that contains a value in the form of a function.

```dart
// Option 1
Function sum = (int num1, int num2) => num1 + num2;
myHigherOrderFunction('Hello', sum);
 
 
// Option 2
myHigherOrderFunction('Hello', (num1, num2) => num1 + num2);
```

If simulated the `myHigherOrderFunction` function will call the `sum` function which is used as a parameter.

```dart
void myHigherOrderFunction(String message, Function myFunction) {
  print(message);
  print(myFunction(3, 4));  // sum(3, 4)    // return 3 + 4
}
```

However, this higher order function declaration can be a little tricky. For example the code below will not detect errors but when run, your application will crash. Do you know why?

```dart
void myHigherOrderFunction(String message, Function myFunction) {
  print(message);
  print(myFunction(4));
}
```

Since we don't specify the function's specifications such as the number of parameters or its return value, all types of functions will work including calling myFunction as above. To overcome this we can be more specific in determining what a valid function to be a parameter looks like.

`void myHigherOrderFunction(String message, int Function(int num1, int num2) myFunction) { }`

In the function above we need to enter a function with two parameters and a return value of int as a parameter. In the actual collection material, we have used a function which is a higher order function, namely the `forEach()` function. For example, we have a list of Fibonacci numbers stored in a variable. `var fibonacci = [0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13];`

So that when we call this function we can perform operations on each item for example printing to the console.

```dart
fibonacci.forEach((item) {
  print(item);
});
```

&emsp;
## 04. Closures
A function can be created in global scope or inside another function. A function that can access variables within its *lexical scope* is called a **closure**. Lexical scope means that in a *nested function*, the inner function has access to the variables in its parent scope.

```dart
void main() {
  var closureExample = calculate(2);
  closureExample();
  closureExample();
}
 
Function calculate(base) {
  var count = 1;
 
  return () => print("Value is ${base + count++}");
}

/* Output :
> Value is 3
> Value is 4
*/
```

Inside the `calculate()` function there is a `count` variable and returns the value as a function. The lambda function inside has access to the `count` variable because it is in the same scope. Because the `count` variable is in the `calculate` scope, it will generally be lost or deleted when the function is finished. However, in the above case the lambda or `closureExample` function still has a reference or access to the `count` variable so it can be changed. The variables in the above mechanism are closed (closed covered), which means they are inside the closure.

&emsp;
## 05. Summary
You are at the end of the Functional Programming module. Let's break down the material you've studied to sharpen your understanding.

1. Functional Programming (FP) is a programming paradigm in which the computational process is based on pure mathematical functions.
2. Functional programming is written in a declarative style that focuses on “what to solve” rather than “how to solve” in an imperative style.
3. There are several concepts and characteristics of functional programming, including :
      1. Pure functions, functions depend on the arguments and parameters passed to them.
      2. Recursion, a function that does not have the concept of looping so that the function only focuses on basic commands.
      3. Immutable variables, functions are immutable , meaning they cannot change a variable once it has been initialized.
      4. First-class citizens, functions have properties that are equivalent to other programming components.
      5. Higher-order function, a function that takes another function as an argument and can also return a function.
4. Anonymous function or lambda is a function that has no name.
5. Closure is a function that can access variables in its lexical scope .

With this summary, it is hoped that you can understand all the material that has been presented. If not, you can review the material provided in this module. For those of you who already feel good, let's move on to the next module!

&emsp;
## 06. Quiz

```dart
var doubler = (num number) => number * 2;
print(doubler(2));
```

1. What functional programming principles are applied to the function above?
<br> =

2. What is Functional Programming?
<br> =