# Dart Type Systems

## Introduction of Dart Type System
In programming languages, a type system is a logical system consisting of a set of rules that assign properties or types to various computer program constructs, such as variables, expressions , functions, or modules. This type system formalizes or provides implied category standards that programmers use for data types, data structures, or other components.

Dart calls his type system a **sound type system** . This soundness means your program can never enter a state where an expression evaluates to a value that doesn't match its type.

The sound type system in Dart is the same as the type system in Java or C#. Where this soundness condition is achieved using a combination of static checks ( compile-time error ) and runtime checks . For example, assigning a `String` to an `int` variable is a compile-time error . Casting `Object` to `String` with as `String` will fail at runtime if the object is not `String`.

The benefits of this type of sound system include:

1. Revealed type-related bugs at compile time .
      The sound type system forces code to be unambiguous about the type, so type-related bugs that might be difficult to spot at runtime can be found at compile time.
2. Code is easier to read.
      Code becomes easier to read because you can rely on values ​​that actually have the specified type. The type on Dart can't lie.
3. Code is easier to manage.
      When you change a piece of code, the type system can warn you about which part of the code was recently broken.
4. Better ahead of time (AOT) compilation .
      Code generated during AOT compilation is much more efficient.