# Effective Dart

## 01. Introduction to Effective Dart
We have finally arrived at the last module in our Getting Started Programming with Darts class. Basically as a programmer, especially working in a team, the majority of our time will be spent reading code rather than writing it. That's what the coding convention is for . Coding conventions are guides for specific programming languages ​​that recommend programming styles, practices, and methods for every aspect of programs written in that language. These conventions usually include indents, comments, declarations, naming, architecture, etc.

Code conventions are very important to programmers for the following reasons:

1. 40% - 80% of the cost of a software used for maintenance ( maintenance ).
2. It is very rare for a piece of software to be maintained on an ongoing basis by its original author.
3. Code conventions improve code readability, allowing programmers to understand new code more quickly and thoroughly.
4. Source code is more organized and clean as a product.

Dart has also developed coding conventions that aim to allow us to write consistent, robust, and fast code. This Convention Dart is known as the Effective Dart. In essence Effective Dart was created to achieve two things:

1. **Be consistent** (Consistent). When it comes to formatting there will be many subjective arguments about which one is better. But consistency will certainly be very helpful objectively.
2. **Be brief** . Dart is designed to be familiar with other programming languages ​​such as C, Java, JavaScript, etc. But Dart is coupled with other features that other languages ​​don't offer yet. If there are many ways to express something, of course you will use the most concise way, right?


&emsp;
## 02. Effective Dart Guide
The Guidelines from the Effective Dart are divided into four sections according to their function.

1. **Style guides** . Defines the rules for laying out and organizing code. This guide also specifies how to format an identifier, whether to use camelCase, _underscore, etc.
2. **Documentation guide** . This guide deals with what is and isn't in comments. Be it a documentation comment or a regular comment.
3. **Usage guides** . This guide teaches how to best utilize language features to implement behaviors. The use of statements or expressions will be discussed here.
4. **Design guides** . This is the broadest yet least binding guide. This guide covers how to design a consistent and usable API library.

Effective Dart has many rules . Each rule will be preceded by a keyword to determine how the nature of the rule. The five keywords include:

1. **DO** . When a rule begins with DO then the practice must always be followed.
2. **DON'T** . On the other hand, a rule starting with DON'T is not a good thing to implement.
3. **PREFERRED** . This is a practice to be followed. However, there may be circumstances where it makes more sense to do otherwise. Make sure you understand the consequences when you ignore this rule.
3. **AVOID** . This is the opposite of PREFER. This guide explains what not to do, but there may be good reasons to do so in some cases.
4. **CONSIDER** . These guidelines are practices you can follow or not follow, depending on your own circumstances and preferences.

While there are tons of rules and guidelines that need to be followed in Effective Dart, we don't have to worry about the rules being too strict. Because most of the existing guides can be said to be common sense in making programs, even if they are not written. In addition, conventions aim to make our code better, easier to read, and of course to maintain.

&emsp;
## 03. Rules Summary
After studying code conventions and Effective Darts, in this module we will discuss some examples of rules in Effective Darts.

### DO name types using UpperCamelCase.
Class, enum, typedef, and type parameters must capitalize the first letter of every word including the first word.

```dart
abstract class Animal {}
abstract class Mammal extends Animal {}
mixin Flyable {}
class Cat extends Mammal with Walkable {}
```

### DON’T use prefix letters.
Since Dart can tell you the type, scope, and other properties of a declaration, there's no reason to add a prefix to an identifier.

```dart
var instance;  // good
var mInstance ;  // bad
```

### PREFER starting function or method comments with third-person verbs.
A documentation comment should focus on explaining what the code does. Adding a third-person verb at the beginning of a comment is one way of doing this.

```dart
// Returns `true` if [username] and [password] inputs are valid.
bool isValid(String username, String password) { }
```

### PREFER a noun phrase for a non-boolean property or variable.
A developer who reads our code will focus on what is in the property. If they care more about how a property is defined, then it's better to make it a method with a verb name.

```dart
// Good
cat.furColor;
calculator.firstNumber;
list.length;
// Bad
list.deleteItems;
```

Meanwhile, for the variable or property booleans PREFER use non-imperative verbs , such as:

```dart
list.isEmpty
dialog.isOpen
```

### DO use ?? to convert null to a boolean value.
This rule applies when an expression can evaluate to true, false, or null and you need to pass the result to something that doesn't accept a null value.

```dart
if(stock?.isEnough) {
  print('Making you a cup of coffee...');
}
```

The above code will throw an exception when the stock is null. To work around this we need to provide a default value when the initial value is null. So the code will be like this: 

`stock?.isEnough ?? false;`

### AVOID using curly braces in interpolation when not needed.
As we know, Dart is equipped with a string interpolation feature to combine string values ​​with other values ​​more easily.

`print('Hi, ${name}, You are ${thisYear - birthYear} years old.');`

However if you interpolate simple identifiers, then curly braces ({}) don't need to be written.

`print('Hi, $name, You are ${thisYear - birthYear} years old.');`

### PREFER async/await over using raw futures.
Asynchronous code can be very difficult to read and debug , even when using a good abstraction like Future. The async-await syntax allows you to write asynchronous code in a synchronous style , making reading code easier.

```dart
// raw future
void main() {
  getOrder().then((value) {
    print('You order: $value');
  })
  .catchError((error) {
    print('Sorry. $error');
  });
  print('Getting your order...');
}
// async-await
void main() async {
  print('Getting your order...');
  try {
    var order = await getOrder();
    print('You order: $order');
  } catch (error) {
    print('Sorry. $error');
  }
}
```

### CONSIDER making the code read like a sentence.
Naming in the code whether it's the name of a variable, function, or others is very important but also not easy. As a solution we can imagine it as if we were making a sentence.

```dart
// “If store is open ...”
If (store.isOpen)
// “hey garfield, eat!”
garfield . eat ();
// Bad example
// It's ambiguous whether to order the shop to close or get the status of the shop
If (store.close)
```

### CONSIDER using function type syntax for parameters.
Dart has a special syntax for defining parameters whose type is a function. The trick is to write the return type before the parameter name and then the parameter of the function after it.

`List filter(bool predicate(item)) { }`

Since Dart version 2, there is a common notation for function types so that they can be used for parameterized functions.

`List filter(Function predicate) { }  // function type syntax`

Actually, some of the rules above are only a part of all the rules in Effective Dart. You can learn more about this Effective Dart guide and rules at the following link: `https://dart.dev/guides/language/effective-dart`.

Finally, maximize the guidelines and conventions that have been made so that your code becomes more qualified, yes. Do your best!

&emsp;
## 04. Summary
Congratulation! We have arrived at the last module. Here we learn about the code convention of Dart. The goal is that we can not only write Dart code, but also write quality code according to existing standards. Let's break down the material you've studied to sharpen your understanding.

1. Coding Conventions are guides that recommend programming styles, practices, and methods for every aspect of programs written in a particular language.
2. The reasons code conventions are so important to programmers are :
      1. Most of the time in developing applications is spent on maintenance .
      2. It is rare for a piece of software to be maintained continuously by the original author.
      3. Improve code readability and understand new code faster.
      4. So that the source code is more organized and clean.
3. The Effective Dart Guide is divided into four sections according to their function, including:
      1. The style guide defines the rules for laying out and managing code.
      2. Documentation guide, a guide related to how to provide comments or documentation on the code.
      3. Usage guide, a guide on how to best utilize language features to implement behavior.
      4. Design guide, a guide covering how to design a consistent and usable API library
4. Each guide will begin with these five keywords, including :
      1. DO, rules that must always be followed.
      2. DON'T, not a good rule to apply.
      3. PREFER, a rule to follow, but there are circumstances where it makes more sense to do otherwise.
      4. AVOID, rules that should be avoided or should not be followed.
      5. CONSIDER, rules that can be followed or not followed, depending on the circumstances and personal preferences.
5. There are lots of rules and guidelines regarding Effective Dart, you can find all the rules at the following link: `https://dart.dev/guides/language/effective-dart`.

Until this last module, I hope you have a good understanding of the basic concepts of Dart and are ready to develop applications with Flutter. If not, feel free to read and review the module. Take advantage of the discussion forums to answer your questions.

There is still a final exam that you need to complete in order to pass and get a certificate in this class. Good luck!

&emsp;
## 05. Quiz

1. When a rule starts with the keyword “Avoid”, what do you need to do with the code? 
<br> =

2. Mention which is not the reason why coding conventions are needed in programming languages!
<br> =